---
layout: post
title: "Serializing object methods using ES6 template strings and eval"
pub_date: 2016-02-29 02:30:00 PM
last_modified: 2016-03-01 11:00:00 AM
categories:
  - javascript
  - experiments
published: true
author: "Adrian Oprea"
twitter: "@opreaadrian"
keywords: javascript, hacks, tricks, es6, ecmascript 6, es2015, template strings, json, stringify
featured_image: /images/posts/serializing-object-methods-using-es6-template-strings-and-eval/post.jpg
---

Understanding the way AJAX and JSON manipulation work in JavaScript could make 
the difference between writing an elegant, easy to reason about application, 
and a crude hack. As far as my experience goes, only a small number of developers 
I’ve talked to in the past year or so, know how to write a vanilla 
`XMLHttpRequest`, from scratch. I do agree that it is important to get the 
job done in a timely manner and not reinvent the wheel, but using something 
without understanding it’s substance is something that I cannot come to terms 
with, for someone other than a junior developer.

## Table of contents
{:.no_toc}

* Table of contents(will contain all headings execept the "Table of contents" one above)
{:toc}

## A bit of background

I've been working with JSON since 2009 and all I knew is that you are able to 
serialize JavaScript objects, by using `JSON.stringify` but only the properties
(values) get serialized, and the methods get left behind.
I started looking into the literature around JSON serialization in JavaScript 
and the only information I found on JSON.org and the Mozilla Developer Network 
confirmed what I already said before, so then I started to think about the 
"forbidden" parts of JavaScript.

In my case, I started learning JavaScript reading
[JavaScript The Good Parts](http://amzn.com/0596517742) written by 
[Douglas Crockford](http://crockford.com/) and if you're like me, 
the rest of your career was highly influenced by that book and Crockford's 
approach to JavaScript and software development. But everything comes at a cost, 
and the cost I had to pay was believing too much in the "Eval is evil" mantra.

## What is JSON?

First, let's start with some basics, namely, let's see what JSON is. 

According to [JSON.org](http://www.json.org/):

> JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is a lightweight data-interchange format. [...]
> JSON is a text format that is completely language independent but uses 
> conventions that are familiar to programmers of the C-family of languages [...]

According to the [Mozilla Developer Network](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/JSON)

> JSON is a syntax for serializing objects, arrays, numbers, strings, booleans, 
> and null. It is based upon JavaScript syntax but is distinct from it: 
> some JavaScript is not JSON, and some JSON is not JavaScript. 

Both definitions tell us one thing: JSON is a format for distributing data 
across "the wire" and can be easily understood and generated by both 
humans and computers.

## What is serialization?

Again, in order to continue, we first need to establish what serialization is, 
and without having to resort to external resources for this, I will give you 
my own definition: "Serialization is a process through which one data format gets 
translated to an intermediary data format, for the purpose of distribution".  

The reverse of serialization is de-serialization, where you take a the 
intermediary data format and turn it back into its original form, so you can 
manipulate it and use it in your application.  
Now, with theory out of the way, let's get to the code.

## Object serialization and the __replacer__ function

Based on the knowledge we have at this point, we can now demonstrate how exactly 
serialization works, so let's take an object, run it through `JSON.stringify` 
and see what we get.

{% highlight javascript %}
'use strict';

let person = {
  name: 'Susan',
  age: 24,
  sayHi: function() {
	console.log('Susan says hi!');
  }
};

const serialized = JSON.stringify(person);

console.log(serialized); // {"name":"Susan","age":24} 

typeof serialized === 'string' // true
{% endhighlight %}

As you can see, the `sayHi` method is nowhere to be seen. The reason is that 
`JSON.stringify` serializes only the properties of the object, leaving its 
methods behind.  
Now, let's say we want to also serialize the `sayHi` method. How would we go about 
that? First, let's take a look at `JSON.stringify`'s signature, outlined below.

{% highlight javascript %}
JSON.stringify(value[, replacer[, space]])

// => value(required) - the object we want to serialize 
// => replacer(optional) - a function that will be called for each of the 
//    object's properties, or an array of strings and numbers that serve 
//    as a whitelist for the property selection process
// => space(optional) - the number of spaces each key will receive as indent
{% endhighlight %}

Our main interest is the `replacer` argument, and we are going to use its function form. In order 
for this trick to work and for the `sayHi` method's code to be properly converted to a string, 
we can call its `toString()` method.  
Calling `toString()` on a function, returns a string representation of the function's body. 
This way, if we call `person.sayHi.toString()` we will get the following output:

{% highlight javascript %}
"function () { console.log('Susan says hi!'); }"
{% endhighlight %}

So now that we know how to get our method's body, let's build the logic to serialize the whole 
`person` object, including its method.

{% highlight javascript %}
'use strict';

let person = {
  name: 'Susan',
  age: 24,
  sayHi: function() {
    console.log('Susan says hi!');
  }
};

let replacer = (key, value) => {
  // if we get a function, give us the code for that function
  if (typeof value === 'function') {
    return value.toString();
  }

  return value;
}

// get a stringified version of our object, and indent the keys at 2 spaces
const serialized = JSON.stringify(person, replacer, 2);

console.log(serialized); 
// {"name":"Susan","age":24,"sayHi":"function () {\n\tconsole.log('Susan says hi!');\n  }"}
{% endhighlight %}

## De-serialization and reviving properties

As you can see, we now have our method, properly serialized and ready for 
transportation "across the wire". What we need to do next is to de-serialize 
our object and make the `sayHi` method executable, again, and this can be 
accomplished using `JSON.parse`.

Similar to what we did with `JSON.stringify`, we will have to take a look at 
`JSON.parse`'s signature in order to get a clearer view of how we will 
perform the de-serialization process in such a way that we can convert our 
current `sayHi` string into a function, again.  

`JSON.parse` has the following signature, according to the Mozilla Developer Network: 

{% highlight javascript %}
JSON.parse(text[, reviver])

// => text(required) - the string we wish to de-serialize and convert back
//    to a standard JavaScript object(JSON)
// => reviver(optional) - function used to pre-process keys and values in order 
//    to render a specific object structure
{% endhighlight %}

Before going any further with the solution, let's first see what template 
strings are, at their most basic level.
According to MDN, template literals(usually called template strings) are string 
literals that allow embedded expressions. To simplify this explanation, let's 
take a look at a piece of code using ES6 template strings and compare it to the 
way we used to mimic this in ES5.

{% highlight javascript %}
//ES6 template strings
let someComputedValue = 5 + 3;
let theTemplate = `This is the result of the computation: ${someComputedValue}`;

console.log(theTemplate);
// "This is the result of the computation: 8"

// ES5 version
var someComputedValue = 5 + 3;
var theTemplate = 'This is the result of the computation: ' + someComputedValue;

console.log(theTemplate);
// "This is the result of the computation: 8"
{% endhighlight %}

You can probably see some good use-cases for template literals, one of them 
being DOM templates. If you'd like 
more info on the topic, [this page on the Mozilla Developer Network](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals) 
sums it up pretty well.

Given that we already have our serialized version of the `person` object, along 
with its `sayHi` method, let's now try to convert the body of the method back to 
executable code.  
For this matter, we're going to have to resort to the "evil" `eval` and before 
using something that so many people labelled as evil, let's see what it does, 
so we are conscious about the risks we're taking.

In a nutshell, `eval` takes strings and treats them as executable code. One of 
the biggest risks you're exposing yourself and your application to would be 
[code injection](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Code_Injection). If you end up 
serializing user-inserted data, be sure to thoroughly validate their input and 
as a rule of thumb, don't run code inserted by your user, unless you're building 
the next [jsbin.com](https://jsbin.com) or the next [codepen.io](https://codepen.io)

With the knowledge we have about `eval` and template strings, we can now 
build our `reviver` function as follows:

{% highlight javascript %}
let reviver = (key, value) => {
  if (typeof key === 'string' && key.indexOf('function ') === 0) {
    let functionTemplate = `(${value})`;
    return eval(functionTemplate);
  }

  return value;
}
{% endhighlight %}

The code is pretty self-explanatory, but for extra clarity, we're building a new 
template for all the items in the string we're parsing, that contain the 
'function' keyword followed by a space, at the very beginning and then we're 
evaluating the resulting expression and returning it to `JSON.parse` in order to 
be added to the final object.  
The final version of the code would look like the snippet below:

{% highlight javascript %}
'use strict';

// serialize.js

let person = {
  name: 'Susan',
  age: 24,
  sayHi: function() {
    console.log('Susan says hi!');
  }
};

let replacer = (key, value) => {
  // if we get a function, give us the code for that function
  if (typeof value === 'function') {
    return value.toString();
  }

  return value;
}

// get a stringified version of our object, and indent the keys at 2 spaces
const serialized = JSON.stringify(person, replacer, 2);

console.log(serialized); 
// {"name":"Susan","age":24,"sayHi":"function () {\n\tconsole.log('Susan says hi!');\n  }"}


// de_serialize.js
let reviver = (key, value) => {
  if (typeof value === 'string' && value.indexOf('function ') === 0) {
    let functionTemplate = `(${value})`;
    return eval(functionTemplate);
  }
  return value;
}

const parsedObject = JSON.parse(serialized, reviver);

parsedObject.sayHi(); // Susan says hi!
{% endhighlight %}

The reason that we wrap the function in parentheses is that we need to force 
the vm to evaluate the function in an expression context, and our function 
needs to be a function expression as it is missing its name. We are only operating 
with `eval` on the value of the `sayHi` key, which is an unnamed function. If 
you'd like more info about this limitation of `eval` take a look at 
[this answer on StackOverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/a/9076377/2423398).  
As you can see, the newly resulted object has the `sayHi` method available and 
ready for use and executing the method prints the same message as `person.sayHi`.

Another issue I ommitted to mention about `eval` is that it is pretty slow, 
because it has to invoke the VM in order to evaluate the code, 
unlike the built-in `Function` constructor, which is highly optimised in newer 
versions of JavaScript engines.
If performance is something that is critical for you, there's an option to use 
the `Function` constructor instead of `eval` in your `reviver` function like 
in the snippet below:

{% highlight javascript %}
let reviver = (key, value) => {
  if (typeof value === 'string' && value.indexOf('function ') === 0) {
    let functionTemplate = `(${value}).call(this)`;
    return new Function(functionTemplate);
  }
  return value;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Even though it is said that the `Function` constructor is faster than `eval`, 
be cautious that in this case, you have to create 2 functions in-memory &mdash;
the outer IIFE that gets auto-executed and returns the method we want.  
You also need to use `Function.prototype.call` in order to keep `this` 
relative to the current object, and not to the window/global object. 

Ultimately, it all comes down to personal preference so whether you use `eval` 
or another method it is all up to you, the important thing is to use what 
makes the most sense for you and gets the job done in an elegant manner. 

## Reference

- [JSON.org](http://json.org/)
- [JavaScript eval() “syntax error” on parsing a function string](http://stackoverflow.com/a/9076377/2423398)
- [JSON](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/JSON)
- [Eval](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/eval)


> Photo credits:  
> [Sergio Delgado](https://www.flickr.com/photos/sdelgado) &mdash; [Three-toed sloth in the Dallas World Aquarium](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sloth)
